---
author: houz
date: 2018-03-27 18:00:00+00:00
layout: post
title: darktable 2.4.2 released
lede: india.jpg
lede_author: <a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/andabata">Kees Guequierre</a>
tags:
  - announcement
  - darktable release
aliases:
    - /2018/03/darktable-242-released/
---
we’re proud to announce the second bugfix release for the 2.4 series of darktable, 2.4.2!

the github release is here: [https://github.com/darktable-org/darktable/releases/tag/release-2.4.2](https://github.com/darktable-org/darktable/releases/tag/release-2.4.2).

as always, please don't use the autogenerated tarball provided by github, but only our tar.xz. the checksums are:

```
$ sha256sum darktable-2.4.2.tar.xz
19cccb60711ed0607ceaa844967b692a3b8666b12bf1d12f2242ec8942fa5a81 darktable-2.4.2.tar.xz
$ sha256sum darktable-2.4.2.dmg
2b0b456f6efbc05550e729a388c55e195eecc827b0b691cd42d997b026f0867c darktable-2.4.2.dmg
$ sha256sum darktable-2.4.2-win64.exe
5181dad9afd798090de8c4d54f76ee4d43cbf76ddf2734364ffec5ccb1121a34 darktable-2.4.2-win64.exe
$ sha256sum darktable-2.4.2-win64.zip
935ba4756e208369b9cabf1ca441ed0b91acb73ebf9125dcaf563210ebe4524d darktable-2.4.2-win64.zip
```

when updating from the currently stable 2.2.x series, please bear in mind that your edits will be preserved during this process, but it will not be possible to downgrade from 2.4 to 2.2.x any more.

#### Important note: to make sure that darktable can keep on supporting the raw file format for your camera, *please* read [this post](https://discuss.pixls.us/t/raw-samples-wanted/5420?u=lebedevri) on how/what raw samples you can contribute to ensure that we have the *full* raw sample set for your camera under CC0 license!

and the changelog as compared to 2.4.1 can be found below.

## New Features

- Add presets to location search in map mode
- Add timestamps to the output of `-d` command line switches
- Add a compression level slider to the TIFF export module
- Add native binary NetPNM loading, without using GraphicsMagick
- Add a battery indicator for people running darktable on a laptop. This is not very portable code and disabled by default
- Allow to use /? to show the help message on Windows

## Bugfixes

- Turn off smooth scrolling for X11/Quartz. That might help with oversensitive scrolling
- Fix reading and writing of TIFFs with non-ASCII filenames on Windows
- Ellipsize background job labels when too long
- Hard code D50 white point when exporting to OpenEXR
- Add tootips to the haze removal module
- Fix a crash when changing lenses while tethering
- Fix incorrect Atom CPU detection on Windows
- Revised performance configuration
- Don't overlay the colorbalance sliders on the left for a cleaner look
- Honor local copy in copy export format
- Make trashing of files on Windows silent
- Fix string termination override on memmove
- Fix a use after free and some memleaks
- Fix a crash in PDF export
- Fix the min color picker
- Don't hardcode '/' in OpenCL paths on Windows

## Camera support, compared to 2.4.1

#### Warning: support for Nikon NEF 'lossy after split' raws was unintentionally broken due to the lack of such samples. Please see [this post](https://discuss.pixls.us/t/nikon-a-specific-raw-sample-wanted/5483?u=lebedevri) for more details. If you have affected raws, please contribute samples!

### Base Support

- Canon PowerShot G1 X Mark III
- Panasonic DMC-FZ2000 (3:2)
- Panasonic DMC-FZ2500 (3:2)
- Panasonic DMC-ZS100 (3:2)
- Sony DSC-RX0
- Sony DSC-RX10M4

### Noise Profiles

- Canon EOS 200D
- Canon EOS Kiss X9
- Canon EOS Rebel SL2
- Canon EOS 760D
- Canon EOS 8000D
- Canon EOS Rebel T6s
- Canon PowerShot G1 X Mark II
- Canon PowerShot G9 X
- Fujifilm X100F
- Nikon D850
- Panasonic DC-G9
- Panasonic DMC-GF6
- Panasonic DMC-LX10
- Panasonic DMC-LX15
- Panasonic DMC-LX9
- Panasonic DMC-TZ70
- Panasonic DMC-TZ71
- Panasonic DMC-ZS50

## Translations

- Dutch
- French
- German
- Hungarian
- Italian
